docs: add docs about defining new SLO (#86)
seznam/slo-exporter: docs/defining_new_slo.md

>   - **Error budget(EB)**: Acceptable amount of errors over a specified time window based on the SLO.

Each service having any consumers should have defines SLO.
For example if your team manages set of microservices,
most probably you would set and measure SLO for any interaction outside your team components(other team components, end users).
Keep in mind that service cannot have higher SLO than lowest of services it depends on.

# 1. Defining SLI
Do a brainstorming for both developers and product owners to
think of the important functionality and characteristics of your service
and what matters to your customers. These will be your SLIs. 
You should be able to represent those as a % of success or failure for the further computation.
> Hint: Do not try to overcomplicate things right from the beginning and stop it from actually computing at least some SLIs.
>       You can iterate on the accuracy later on.

## SLI computation approaches
There are 2 main approaches to measure the SLI

### Time based
This SLI would be based on some time interval and percentage of the time the service meets the criteria.

> Most common use-case would be an uptime computed as percentage of the time the service is operational(it might be tricky to tell what functional means).

Reviewer: Google presented a more complex implementation of time-based SLO with:
- computing per-user uptime
- computing resulting uptime for large number of SLO time-windows

See [the talk](https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi20/presentation/hauer) for details.

- Easy to calculate
##### Disadvantages
- Does not reflect if the service is used at all (overnight for example)
- Does not reflect the impact of an outage (if only one or thousands of users were affected by an outage)

### Event based
This SLI would be computed per event of the observed phenomenon.
Most common use-case would be observing each HTTP request result or result of some async job triggered by the user.

##### Advantages
- Actually reflects impact of the outage on users (if an outage happens but no one uses the service no one cares)
- Reflects the amount of the outage impact (outage in prime time affects the EB more than in low traffic periods of a day)
##### Disadvantages
- Can be harder to compute and filter
    - Large number of events to aggregate
    - Some events may not be relevant to user experience (external monitoring HTTP request probes for example)
- May be hard to alert on, in case of low frequency phenomenons (if the event occurs twice a day, single failed event might cause 50% failure ratio on short time ranges)
- May lead to accounting repeated events of one user leading to multiplication of the impact (user refreshing the page to see if its operational).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Event based SLO computation is slo-exporter's primary focus at this moment.**
```

Reviewer: Possibly also mention this in the main readme. What do you think @FUSAKLA ?

## SLI types
These are the most common types of SLIs we encountered, of course you can think of any others that suit you but
if possible try to stick to these common ones for consistency.
They are based on the SRE workbook, and it makes it easier for others to understand what the SLI means.

For more inspiration see https://sre.google/workbook/implementing-slos/#slis-for-different-types-of-services

### Availability
#### Time based
Also, often referred to as an _uptime_, a ratio of the time when the service is up to the time it is down.
You should be careful what actually means the service _is down_.
Mostly suitable for some continuously running computations or in cases when the event based SLI is hard

> or even impossible to evaluate reliably for example SLO for relational databases(latency od success of the event depends on the user query).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or even impossible to evaluate reliably.
```
Honestly, I would drop this example, imho it is not very relevant. We solve this by classifying events of various computation complexity to different classes (each having different SLOs). Time-based computation does  not make this problem any easier or harder opposed to request-based imho.

Author: This is based on real world example we experienced, but I'm ok leaving this out.

#### Event based
Probably most common SLI used mainly for web services computed as a ratio of failed/successful requests served by the service.
Should generally describe ratio of failed events to its total count. 
The Simplest example could be expressed as a PromQL `http_request_duration_seconds_count{service="foo", status_code=~"5.."} / ignoring(status_code) http_request_duration_seconds_count{service="foo"}`.

> REST API requests are quite easy to observe but dealing with for example GraphQL, XmlRPC, gRPC might be challenging
> since the result might be encoded in the request body or in GraphQL case one HTTP request might contain several responses
> thus it's hard to just binary say success or failure.

> Carefully decide what is the failure of your service and what is the client's fault.
> It always depends on the service but a lot of 4xx HTTP statuses might be disputable.

### Latency
Similar to the availability SLI type, but instead of a success or failure we measure a latency of the event.
Sticking to the example of REST API we would observe how long it takes to serve the request.

> Latency SLI is observed in the form of percentiles such as "95% of events take longer than 1.2s".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Latency SLI is observed in the form of percentiles such as "95% of events are served within 1.2s".
```

> Keep in mind that a failed event might take way less time than a successful one. So you should consider if the failed events should be counted into your latency SLI or not.

> > Also, for example HTTP status 499 means the client gave up the waiting. Be careful if this is observed by the latency SLI or by the availability type.

Reviewer 2: I am not sure if `499` status code is good example. Its not sandardized - only nginx uses it https://httpstatus.in/499/

Author: Ok, good point, thanks. I'll exclude the status code and just describe the situation :grimacing: 

```suggestion
> Also be careful for example on user side timeouts. It might be observed in both, the latency and availability SLI type.
```

> > Also, for example HTTP status 499 means the client gave up the waiting. Be careful if this is observed by the latency SLI or by the availability type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Also, for example HTTP status 499 means the client gave up the waiting. You should consider whether you want to observe such events by both latency and availability SLI types, or only one of them.
```

Regarding the 499 status, I'm ok with this example, unless @FuFikCZ has better proposal.

### Quality

> Again event based SLI describing the quality of some events. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SLI describing the quality of some events. 
```

For example if you return a search response to a client and your service is sharded and not all of your shards are available at the moment,
your response might be degraded in quality. This should be expressed again as a % so in this example % of shards that were (un)available.

### Freshness
Should detect if served data is not outdated. 
#### Time based
ratio of time the data was outdated.
#### Event based
Ratio of events affected by the outdated events.

# 2. Defining SLO
Definition of the SLO should be done by the product owner of the service since he knows what is the desired quality.
In case you have no idea where to start we advise recommend using historical data to determine the current best effort SLO

> and iterate on that to make it better.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and iterate on that to make it better. 

Regardless of how you determine the initial SLO, it is crucial that its breach is actionable - in other words, if burning-out whole error budget results in no corrective actions, the SLO should be changed (lowered) as it obviously was placed too high initially. 
```

If you want to read more about it take a look at [this series of blog posts we wrote](https://medium.com/@sklik.devops/our-journey-towards-slo-based-alerting-bd8bbe23c1d6).

Ideally everyone in company should use the same approach how to compute or at least visualize SLOs. 
In case slo-exporter is too much of a complexity for your trivial SLO computation,
we advise you to at least try to stick to the metric naming used by slo-exporter and possibly using
at least its alerting rules and dashboards.

## Using Prometheus only
This can be easy to implement, and you can find number of upstream
projects that can help you with that such as [this SLO generator](https://promtools.dev/alerts/errors), 
[Sloth](https://sloth.dev/) or [the Pyrra project](https://github.com/pyrra-dev/pyrra) having even a nice visualization.

#### Advantages
- No need for application changes, you can use already existing Prometheus metrics you already collect
- No need for other infrastructure changes

#### Disadvantages
- Limited by cardinality because of the Prometheus architecture and purpose
  (if needed for filtering of events or having more precise thresholds for some events)

> - For latency and quality SLI types need to use histograms and its buckets need to match the thresholds

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A need to use histograms and its buckets to match the thresholds for latency and quality SLI types
```

- Computing SLO based on high cardinality metrics over 4w can be enormously demanding for the Prometheus cluster

## Using slo-exporter
Slo exporter was built to solve more complex SLO setups and to unify SLO computation.
It has support to compute SLO based on querying Prometheus data, tailing logs from file, receiving logs from Envoy proxy, following Kafka topic or reading logs from Elasticsearch.

### 1. Choose source of the events

> #### Querying Prometheus

Reviewer: Please link this from the prometheus-ingester module's doc for cases when users would skip this doc and go directly for module's documentation

Author: done here https://github.com/seznam/slo-exporter/pull/86/commits/8124d42eef4dadd3ca48e00ae52980040e02e07f

This mode is mostly just for unification of the SLO computation so everyone uses the same tooling.
It could be replaced by Prometheus recording rules and just hooking into the alerting by using the same metric naming schema as slo-exporter.
It also does not support HA setup, so it's not advised to use this and avoid it if possible.
Slo-exporter documentation can be found [here](https://github.com/seznam/slo-exporter/blob/master/docs/modules/prometheus_ingester.md) and complete example with whole configuration and kubernetes manifests
[here](https://github.com/seznam/slo-exporter/tree/master/examples/prometheus).

> > Warning: in this setup, the slo-exporter cannot run in multiple replicas because it would lead to duplicating the observed events. Make sure to alert on that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Warning: in this setup, it is important to not duplicate observed events - for example by running slo-exporter in more instances. In is adviced to run slo-exporter with prometheus ingester module as a single global replica or to shard the queries so that each slo-exporter instance handles different subset of events. Once you decide what is going to be your deployment model, create alerts to cover this.
```

#### From Envoy access logs
If your service is accessed by users via Envoy proxy, you can configure it to send the access logs using gRPC to the slo-exporter.
Documentation about the slo-exporter gRPC logging module is [here](https://github.com/seznam/slo-exporter/blob/master/docs/modules/envoy_access_log_server.md),
documentation how to configure Envoy to send the access logs over gRPC can be found [here](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/data/accesslog/v3/accesslog.proto).
Complete example of the setup is [here](https://github.com/seznam/slo-exporter/tree/master/examples/envoy_proxy).

#### Elasticsearch
> Currently in experimental mode

In case you want to compute the SLO based on your application logs and use an ELK stack, you can hook the slo-exporter to it.

> > Warning: in this setup, the slo-exporter cannot run in multiple replicas because it would lead to duplicating the observed events. Make sure to be alert on that.

Reviewer: This should be primarily in the elasticsearch module's documentation, which I now see is completely missing :thinking:

Author: Because it's not in the master :P

Author: I'll drop the whole ELK part

Author: https://github.com/seznam/slo-exporter/pull/86/commits/8124d42eef4dadd3ca48e00ae52980040e02e07f

#### Tailing file logs
Similar to those previous but requires the slo-exporter to be running as a sidecar to each observed service instance and tail its application logs.
slo-exporter documentation [here](https://github.com/seznam/slo-exporter/blob/master/docs/modules/tailer.md)
and a full example [here](https://github.com/seznam/slo-exporter/tree/master/examples/nginx_proxy).

#### Reading Kafka topic
In some cases if you want to avoid logging and need high cardinality data you can send each event to a Kafka topic and slo-exporter would read them from there.
Slo-exporter expects the messages to be in the particular format described [here](https://github.com/seznam/slo-exporter/blob/master/docs/modules/kafka_ingester.md).
Full example can be found [here](https://github.com/seznam/slo-exporter/tree/master/examples/kafka).

### 2. Configuring and deploying the slo-exporter
Based on the decisions made, configure the slo-exporter according to [the documentation](https://github.com/seznam/slo-exporter/blob/master/docs/configuration.md)
and deploy it for example in kubernetes. Example k8s manifests can be found in [../kubernetes](../kubernetes).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generally, the pipeline should consist of the following stages, in which you need to:
- filter out the unwanted events (e.g. relabel module)
- normalize events' metadata (e.g. eventMetadataRenamer, relabel modules)
- build events' `event_key` (event_key_generator module)
- classify events (in case you want to apply different SLOs) (metadataClassifier, dynamicClassififer, statisticalClassifier modules)
- evaluate each event against given SLI types - availability, latency (slo-event-producer module)
- export events (prometheusExporter module)
```

### 3. Setting up alerts

> Slo-exporter comes with a set of prepared Prometheus recording rules and alerts to be used for the alerting. Those can be found [here](https://github.com/seznam/slo-exporter/tree/master/prometheus). Also you can use [the slo-rule-generator tool](https://github.com/seznam/slo-exporter/tree/master/tools/slo-rules-generator) to generate some of the most common recording rules for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Slo-exporter comes with a set of prepared Prometheus recording rules and alerts to be used for the alerting. Those can be found [here](https://github.com/seznam/slo-exporter/tree/master/prometheus). Also you can use [the slo-rule-generator tool](https://github.com/seznam/slo-exporter/tree/master/tools/slo-rules-generator) to generate recording rules needed to activate each domain - those specify domain's ownership metadata, SLO thresholds, burn-rate alerts thresholds.
```

slo-exporter documentation [here](https://github.com/seznam/slo-exporter/blob/master/docs/modules/tailer.md)
and a full example [here](https://github.com/seznam/slo-exporter/tree/master/examples/nginx_proxy).

#### Reading Kafka topic
In some cases if you want to avoid logging and need high cardinality data you can send each event to a Kafka topic and slo-exporter would read them from there.
Slo-exporter expects the messages to be in the particular format described [here](https://github.com/seznam/slo-exporter/blob/master/docs/modules/kafka_ingester.md).
Full example can be found [here](https://github.com/seznam/slo-exporter/tree/master/examples/kafka).

### 2. Configuring and deploying the slo-exporter
Based on the decisions made, configure the slo-exporter according to [the documentation](https://github.com/seznam/slo-exporter/blob/master/docs/configuration.md)
and deploy it for example in kubernetes. Example k8s manifests can be found in [../kubernetes](../kubernetes).

Most common steps you will need to do in the slo-exporter pipeline are:

>   - filter out the unwanted events (e.g. [relabel module](./modules/relabel.md))
>   - normalize events' metadata (remove ids from URL etc) (e.g. [event_metadata_renamer](./modules/event_metadata_renamer.md), [relabel modules](./modules/relabel.md))
>   - build events' `event_key` (identifier used in the prometheus metrics exported by the slo-exporter for debugging) ([event_key_generator module](./modules/event_key_generator.md))
>   - classify events (in case you want to have different objectives for distinct event groups) ([metadata_classifier](./modules/metadata_classifier.md), [dynamic_classifier](./modules/dynamic_classifier.md), [statistical_classifier](./modules/statistical_classifier.md) modules)
>   - evaluate each event against given SLI thresholds - ([slo_event_producer](./modules/slo_event_producer.md) module)
>   - export events ([prometheus_exporter](./modules/prometheus_exporter.md) module)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1. filter out the unwanted events (e.g. [relabel module](./modules/relabel.md))
  2. normalize events' metadata (remove ids from URL etc) (e.g. [event_metadata_renamer](./modules/event_metadata_renamer.md), [relabel modules](./modules/relabel.md))
  3. build events' `event_key` (identifier used in the prometheus metrics exported by the slo-exporter for debugging) ([event_key_generator module](./modules/event_key_generator.md))
  4. classify events (in case you want to have different objectives for distinct event groups) ([metadata_classifier](./modules/metadata_classifier.md), [dynamic_classifier](./modules/dynamic_classifier.md), [statistical_classifier](./modules/statistical_classifier.md) modules)
  5. evaluate each event against given SLI thresholds - ([slo_event_producer](./modules/slo_event_producer.md) module)
  6. export events ([prometheus_exporter](./modules/prometheus_exporter.md) module)
```

On second thought here, I guess its better to pinpoint these are to be done in the particular order..
